docs: add a how-to guide for migrating a library to charmlibs (#224)
canonical/charmlibs: .docs/how-to/migrate.md

(how-to-migrate)=
# How to migrate to the charmlibs monorepo

This guide will walk you through migrating an existing Charmhub-hosted library to the `charmlibs` monorepo.

```{tip}
This guide is for library authors.
If you're a library user trying to figure out how to switch to the `charmlibs` version of a library, all you need to do is:
1. Delete your vendored copy of the Charmhub-hosted library, remove any references to it in your `charmcraft.yaml`, and remove any dependencies you added for it.

> 2. Add the library to your charm as a regular Python dependency with the appropriate version constraints -- the library's PyPI page is a good starting point here.

Reviewer: If someone knows the package name, the PyPI page shouldn't be hard to find :grin: But how about mentioning that PyPI pages are linked from the library listings on this site?

Author: I'm struggling to find a concise way to say that, so I'll just keep this simple for now.
```suggestion
2. Add the library to your charm as a regular Python dependency (with the appropriate version constraints).
```

3. Update any imports to refer to the new library -- the library's reference docs should explain this.
```

> ## Getting started

Reviewer: I just noticed that the section titles should be "Get started", "Migrate your library's code", etc. Matching the first how-to guide.

The first thing to check is whether the library you're migrating is an {ref}`interface library <charm-libs-interface>`.

> That is, is it responsible for abstracting away the management of a specific interface's databag contents for charms.

Reviewer: A question mark feels more natural to me here

```suggestion
That is, is it responsible for abstracting away the management of a specific interface's databag contents for charms?
```

If it is, it will be distributed under the `charmlibs.interfaces` namespace instead of the `charmlibs` namespace, and you'll want to think about interface definitions and tests too.

> After checking out your local copy of the `charmlibs` monorepo, run the following command to add a new directory for your library with an appropriately structured Python package and tests laid out for you.

Reviewer: "local copy" suggests something's already been checked out? How about "After cloning your fork of the `charmlibs` monorepo"?

> After checking out your local copy of the `charmlibs` monorepo, run the following command to add a new directory for your library with an appropriately structured Python package and tests laid out for you.

Reviewer: I feel it's OK to drop the last little bit:

```suggestion
After checking out your local copy of the `charmlibs` monorepo, run the following command to add a new directory for your library with an appropriately structured Python package and tests.
```

Author: ```suggestion
After cloning your fork of the `charmlibs` monorepo, run the following command to add a new directory for your library with an appropriately structured Python package and tests.
```

`````{tab-set}
````{tab-item} General libraries

```bash
just init
```

> You'll be prompted for information about your package, with the default shown in brackets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You'll be prompted for information about your package, with default values shown in brackets.
```

The most important piece of information to get right initially is the package name.
This should be the name of the package as users would type it when they import with:
```python
from charmlibs import <your package name>
```
Typically this should be the `<module name>` component of the Charmhub-hosted libs name: `<charm name>.v<n>.<module name>`.
For example, `operator_libs_linux.v2.snap` is now available as `charmlibs.snap`.

However, this name must be unique across the `charmlibs` namespace packages defined in the `charmlibs` monorepo.
This is different from Charmhub, where the name only needed to be unique across the libraries defined by a specific charm.

> If the name you want to use for your library is already taken, consider the following:

Reviewer: I wonder about calling even more attention to the difference from Charmhub. Something like:

````suggestion
```{important}
The package name must be unique across the `charmlibs` namespace packages defined in the `charmlibs` monorepo.
This is different from Charmhub, where the name only needed to be unique across the libraries defined by a specific charm.
```

If the name you want to use for your library is already taken, consider the following:
````

1. Is the functionality you're looking for available from the existing library with the same name?
    a. If not, would it make sense to add it to that library?

>     b. If so, perhaps the library you're looking at migrating could be deprecated without migration.

Reviewer: The sub bullets are not rendering - this should do it:

```suggestion
    1. If not, would it make sense to add it to that library?
    2. If so, perhaps the library you're looking at migrating could be deprecated without migration.
```

2. Is there another logical name your library could use?

Most of the `just` commands run later in this guide require the path to your library's project directory,

> which is just `<package name>` for general libraries.

Reviewer: I feel "just" can be dropped, especially to minmise conflict with `just`. Should this part also mention what the project directory is for interface libs?

```suggestion
which is `<package name>` for general libraries.
```

You'll also want to check for any config files under the old `<interface name>` directory (for example, a `ruff.toml` file), and incorporate any applicable settings into your project's `pyproject.toml`.

Most of the `just` commands run later in this guide require the path to your library's project directory,
with is `interfaces/<interface name>` for interface libraries.
We'll refer to this as `<library path>` in examples.
````
`````

## Migrating your library's code

This is the easy bit, since Charmhub-hosted libs are only a single module.
Download a copy of the latest release of your library, and add it to your new package as a private module, alongside the `__init__.py` file.

`````{tab-set}
````{tab-item} General libraries
```
<library path>/src/charmlibs/<name>/_<name>.py
```
````

````{tab-item} Interface libraries
```
<library path>/src/charmlibs/interfaces/<name>/_<name>.py
```
````
`````

Now follow these steps to migrate your library's source code:
1. Copy the copyright header from `__init__.py` to `_<name>.py` to satisfy the linter.
2. Move the docstring from `_<name>.py` to `__init__.py` so that it's included in your library's automatically built reference docs.

> 3. Document in the `_<name>.py` docstring the API and patch version of the Charmhub-hosted library.

Reviewer: I don't understand step 3. Are the API and patch version going into `_<name>.py` purely for historical reference?

4. Delete `LIB_ID`, `LIB_API`, and `LIB_PATCH` from `_<name>.py` -- unless they're used internally by the library, then you'll need to keep them for now.

> 5. Move the contents of `PYDEPS` to the `dependencies` entry in your `pyproject.toml`, and delete the `PYDEPS` key. You should add any non-documented dependencies too (for example, `ops`). Consider adding version constraints to your dependencies too.

Author: ```suggestion
5. Move the contents of `PYDEPS` to the `dependencies` entry in your `pyproject.toml`, and delete the `PYDEPS` variable. You'll also need to add any additional dependencies that were assumed to be provided by the charm, like `ops` or `pydantic`. Consider adding version constraints to your dependencies too.
```

6. Import the public API of your library to `__init__.py` and add the imported names to `__all__`, like this:
```python

> # immediately before or after from ._version -- sorted alphabetically

Author: Good idea, rewording slightly -- CI will catch this if they get it wrong anyway.
```suggestion
# immediately before or after from ._version (imports are sorted alphabetically)
```

from ._<name> import (
    # your library's public API
)

...

__all__ = [
    # the names we imported, as strings
]
```

You can now test that your library can be built and imported by running the simple unit tests that your project was initialized with.

> From anywhere in the repository, run the following command:

Reviewer: Suggestion for consistency

```suggestion
From anywhere in the repo, run the following command:
```

```bash
just unit <library path>
```

```{tip}
Commit your code now if you haven't already!
```

To be merged, your library will need to comply with the repo's linting and static type checking.

You can also check if your docstrings are compatible with the format that Sphinx expects when building the reference docs.
From anywhere in the repository, run `just docs`.
This builds the reference docs for all the libraries.

> To speed things up by only building reference docs for your library, run:

Reviewer: Small suggestion for slightly easier reading

```suggestion
To speed things up, only build the reference docs for your library:
```

```bash
just docs html <library path>
```

## Migrating your library's tests

This part is a bit trickier.

> With any luck, your library was previously developed in a placeholder charm that exists purely for library distribution purposes.

Reviewer: I think it's fine without the extra word

```suggestion
With any luck, your library was previously developed in a placeholder charm that exists purely for library distribution.
```

If your library's development and testing was tightly coupled to a real charm, this step will be more involved.
You'll need to consider which tests can live alongside the library, and which only make sense with the charm.
You might want to add a simplified dummy charm to run some of the tests against.

### Unit tests

> The following assumes the simple case:

Reviewer: It wasn't immediately obvious what this was referring to. How about

```suggestion
Assuming your library wasn't coupled to a real charm:
```

Author: ```suggestion
If your library wasn't tightly coupled to a real charm, these steps should be sufficient:
```

1. Add any unit test dependencies (like `ops[testing]`) to the `unit` dependency group in your `pyproject.toml`.
2. Copy any relevant contents of your `conftest.py` to `tests/unit/conftest.py`.
3. Copy your library's existing unit test files to `tests/unit/`, along with any data files, dummy charms, and so on.
4. Correct the imports in those files.

Replace imports like this:
```python
from charms.<charm>.v<n> import <name>
from charms.<charm>.v<n>.<name> import ...
```
With imports like this:
`````{tab-set}
````{tab-item} General libraries
```python
from charmlibs import <name>
from charmlibs.<name> import ...
```
````

````{tab-item} Interface libraries
```python
from charmlibs.interfaces import <name>
from charmlibs.interfaces.<name> import ...
```
````
`````

There's now a good chance that the following command will successfully run your unit tests!

> ```{warning}

Reviewer: It looks a bit odd to have the warning between the text and the command. Did you mean to put it somewhere else? I think after the command would be good. I also think that it's worth mentioning "Don't add `pytest`" in step 1, so that the reader sees this as soon as they start copying dependencies.

Author: Maybe it could go right before the `Unit tests` section? It does apply to all types of tests. I agree that it's nicer coming before they inadvertently add `pytest` to their dependencies.

Author: I've moved it there for now.

```

### Functional tests

While unit tests are run across a selection of the Python versions that your library supports,
functional tests are run on different Ubuntu bases using the system Python.
They're intended for tests that interact with the real world, but don't require a real Juju deployment.

The process for migrating them is exactly the same as for unit tests.

> Read more: {ref}`tutorial-add-functional-tests`, {ref}`charmlibs-functional-tests`

### Integration tests

Integration tests involve packing your library into a charm and deploying it on a real Juju model.

> Read more: {ref}`tutorial-add-integration-tests`, {ref}`charmlibs-integration-tests`

If you take a look at your `<library path>/tests/integration` directory, you'll see a `pack.sh` script.
Currently it packs a simple `k8s` or `machine` charm (defined in the `<library path>/tests/integration/charms`) directory, depending on the `CHARMLIBS_SUBSTRATE` variable that is set in CI.
It's executed in CI via `just pack-k8s` or `just pack-machine`.
The integration tests themselves use `jubilant` to deploy and test the packed charm.
They're executed via `just integration-k8s` or `just integration-machine`.

> 

Author: Good call, making a small tweak to my original wording as well.
```suggestion
If you take a look at your `<library path>/tests/integration` directory, you'll see a `pack.sh` script.
Currently it packs a simple `k8s` or `machine` charm, depending on the `CHARMLIBS_SUBSTRATE` variable that is set in CI.
In CI, the script is executed by `just pack-k8s` or `just pack-machine`.
The integration tests provided by the template use `jubilant` to deploy and test the packed charm.
They're executed by `just integration-k8s` or `just integration-machine`.

The simple `k8s` and `machine` charms are defined in the `<library path>/tests/integration/charms` directory.
```

You're more than welcome to fit your existing integration tests into this structure.
However, the use of the `pack.sh` script is completely optional -- you're free to remove it entirely, in which case that step is skipped in CI.
This is especially useful if your integration tests used `pytest-operator` to pack and deploy charms from the tests themselves.

In CI, integration tests are run (separately) with a Juju machine cloud and a Juju K8s cloud.

> The `charmlibs` CI is aware of two special `pytest` marks, `k8s_only` and `machine_only`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `charmlibs` CI is aware of two special `pytest` marks: `k8s_only` and `machine_only`.
```
